Welcome back.
I'm Alex Bowers from Learntoprogram.tv,
and in this video I'll be
showing you the different data types that
there are within Python.
Well, the most important ones at least
anyways.
So the first one we've already roughly
seen is numbers, where there is
two types of number data types, and that
is an integer and a float.
Now, if you've done any programming in any
other
languages you've might have heard float
being called a double.
It's the same thing as just when it has a
floating decimal point.
So, this will be an integer, number 42,
number 50, number 120.
They're all integers.
But as soon as it has a decimal point, it
becomes a float.
And I will show this by just quickly doing
a
is equal to 50, and then I will do type A.
And I need to print out.
And inside the print, if we actually do a
comma, it allows us to do another print as
well.
And so if we do type a,a it'll allow us to
see the type and then the value of that.
So if we save that it's [UNKNOWN], you'll
see at the
bottom we get a class of integer and a
value of 50.
So if I was to add a 50.0 even though the
actual value hasn't changed.
The way it's represented is changed, and
it's now called a float.
And a float is a decimal is something
which has a decimal point.
Now, there are a couple of things that you
can do with with a float and integers
which are different, which is why you
might
need something in particular from one way
or another.
But I will go over those later on within
the course.
The main thing that you should know at the
moment is that
the two different types exist but they do
have different meanings and purposes.
And also that you can convert one to the
other.
So, for example, if we wanted one to be
an integer, we'd do an int function around
it.
This is called type casting.
And what you do then is you type 50.0
inside there.
And if you run that, you'll get an integer
of 50, and that just rounds it off.
It cuts off any decimal points even if
it's 0.9, it will
round it down to 50 because it doesn't
take into effect rounding.
If you wanted to do that you'd have to use
the function round.
Which would then, there you go, it would
now run it
and convert that to 51 cuz it's close to
51 than 50.
So there are maths functions, or math
functions, available which
we will be covering later on again in the
course.
But, because you can do the typecasting of
integer,
that also means you can do the typecasting
of float.
So, if you were to have 50.9, and when
that, it would stay at 50.9.
If you were to get rid of those two
digits, it'd come up as 50.0.
So, now that you can type cast between
floating
integer, you can, con, control the way in
which the application runs.
Which is quite a useful thing to have.
Now the next type of data that we're going
to be using is also is called a string.
And so, the way you represent a string is
by using either
two single quotes, one at the beginning
and one at the end.
Or two double quotes, one at the
beginning, one at the end.
Now it must be the same type of quotes at
the beginning and
at the end, so it can tell what the actual
content between it is.
And so, this is a string.
As you can see, if I was to run this, you
get a class
of str which stands for string, and the
output is this is a string.
Now before I mentioned that you need to
use one of each quote at each end.
However, there is a way in which you can
do triple quotes, which allows you to do
multi-line text, and so this is a string,
would print it out over three lines.
So, there you can see this is a string is
a class.
If I just remove the type from there, it
recognizes these as a string even
though you are using a different way of
representing it, it is still a string.
You'll notice that we have, it has this
tab from inside, and that's
because it follows the exact formatting
that it has within this string over here.
But also you'll notice it has an extra
line at the top, which you might not want.
The way you can get rid of that is
something called escaping.
What you do is you add a backslash as the
last character on the string, on the 1st
line, or the last character on any line,
it'll have the same effect.
And what it does is it escapes the actual,
escapes the actual character that follows
it.
And there is a character here, which
is invisible and it's the paragraph
character,
which it looks sort of like a backwards p
with two lines going down.
That's the sort of character which is
invisible but it is
saved there, and that's what makes it have
a new line.
And so, likewise if I was to put a
backslash on here
and run this, we would get this a string
on the same line.
So, as you can see, all it does is control
well, escape certain characters.
Now, you can do this with either single or
double quotes,
and again it must be the same if beginning
and the end.
Although it is much cleaner to look at to
use
single quotes than double quotes, because
that just looks more untidy.
Because there's more lines going down.
Okay, the next thing that we're going to
have to look at.
Is the fact that you can't escape multiple
different things.
I'll get back to using single line strings
for now.
So, this is a string.
If I wanted to have a new line, what you
have to do is backward slash n.
And what backward slash n is a special
escape character which refers to
making a new line, the invisible paragraph
sign.
And so when you run this you get this as a
string.
But if you were to actually want to have
slash n, backward
slash n within your content, you need to
convert into a raw string.
Because obviously, this is being processes
as being a special character.
But there might be an occasion when you
want to actually output slash n.
The way you do that is to convert it into
a raw string by putting an r in front of
it.
And now you'll get this is r.
I'm sorry, that's not right.
There we go.
You need to an end of backslash to it, and
that will convert it into a vosh, a var
escaped character.
And what you do there is you have you now
get the output of slash n.
And what that backwards slash there does
is it escapes the one
after it, so you have two backwards
slashes will escape the backwards slash.
And that backward slash no longer escapes
the n.
So now you end up with just slash n.
If you're confused by that, don't worry
too much.
It's a simple, sort of concept, and you
will
learn more about it as we progress
throughout the course.
Okay the, there is another very
useful thing which you use within string,
and that is to add extra data to it.
So, we're going to add another, another
variable and
we're call this one, just put "Hello"
within it.
And what you'll see is
this is the old way of doing it and you
use a
%s, and afterwards you put a percent and
then the actual letter.
So I'll change that letter just to make it
more obvious.
I'll call that b.
And if you run this.
You'll see that this is hello a string,
which is
what you'd expect to happen because that
%s there stands
for a string input and %b just shows that
we're
using, what that percent is and we're
using the variable b.
The percent sign is just a way to
reference that we are
finding an input from somewhere else
within the script and they are variable.
There is another use for percentage which
we will get into when
we go into arithmetic, see arithmetic
operators which is simply called modulus
function.
But we'll move onto that later on when we
get more back into numbers again.
But as I mentioned, this the old way of
doing it, and there is a much newer
way which is within 3.2 of my career 3.1.
But came in with 3.7, and it is the way
Python is heading towards.
And this way is kind of obsolete, and it's
going to be removed within the next
version or two.
So, it's probably best not to use this
method, although I just showed you
it just so you can see the difference
between the old and the new.
Cuz if you see any code online, you'll see
it most likely the old method, which is
this method.
The new, oh, it's worth noting that, say,
if I was to replace
this with an I then that would put an
integer, and so on.
And an f, for float.
A b for, boolean, which I'll cover in a
second.
And a d, for dictionary, which I'll cover,
again, in a few minutes.
So, the new way of doing this is what you
do is add curly braces.
The curly braces are next to the return
key, and
you have to do shift and then open and
close it.
And what you have to do now is format,
which is just a function which.
Append something, or insert something into
the
string where ever the curly brackets are.
And if we were to run this now, you'll see
we get the exact same output.
However, this is the new way of doing it,
and this is the way
in which you should be doing inserting
data into a string from now on.
The way in which this would be considered
useful is
if you were taking input from a user then
you
could output a certain value from a
function, or you
could output a certain value based on what
they put.
So if they were to insert then [UNKNOWN]
for example, how to use the name
Alex, and an application might say
something like welcome.
That would do there, is it announcing it
welcome Alex, for example.
So that is the sort of idea behind it.
And that is what we will be using it for
most of the time.
Now there's also another
couple of data types which are sort of
related to
an array, which, if you don't know what an
array is, don't worry about it too much.
It's called a list in Python, which sort
of
describes it more closely to what it
actually is.
And so there's two types of lists, one's
called a tuple and one's called a list.
And a tuple you define using the paren,
parenthesis, and how you define it
is by putting any variable name is equal
to and then open and close the brackets.
Then just do one, two, three, four, five.
And to separate each file you just put
comma between it.
And what you'll see I'll just do print,
type XX, and there you'll
see its the class of the tuple and you the
values of one ,two, three, four and five.
Now, there is a function called append,
where
where you can append a value to a list.
However, with a tuple, is it doesn't
exist.
Because a tuple can not be modified.
It is declared once, and then that is all
it can be kept at.
So it was similar to a constant really.
However, if you wanted to change
something, what you would use is you
would use something called a list which is
declared by using square brackets.
And if you to run this you would get a
class of
the list and square brackets of one, two,
three, four, and five.
Now, if we were to add back in that append
function, you'll now get one, two, three,
four, five and six.
So, there is different uses between the
two.
But the main difference is that one of
them can modify and one can't.
If you can't modify something, then you're
less likely to make a mistake with it.
So if you don't need to modify something,
it's better
to use a tuple than it is to use a list.
Because using a two pole, if you were to
try and modify it, and when you weren't
meant to,
for example, then it would throw that over
and
you'd be able to find out where your
problem was.
Whereas a list As you see cuz it allows
you to insert and append and prepend and
so on.
It would allow you to continue without
knowing that you've made mistakes and
where.
In which case, it might actually break
your application, for example.
Okay, and now that we've covered both of
list and both the list and the tables.
There are a couple of things in which are
special, with lists which you can't do
within a tuple.
And that is to declare a certain
memory location within a loss in, a
certain index within the within the list.
And you do that by using the square
brackets and the index value.
And the index value here is three.
However, we inserted a number two.
And if you look up here, number three is
the third one across.
And the reason for that is that a list is
indexed starting at zero.
So, this has an index of zero.
This has an index of one.
And this here has an index of two.
We're referencing the index of two, so
that's why we get the value of three back.
The next thing in which you may find
useful, and we'll cover later on is
something called Well, it's where you can
select a value within a range.
So if I was to go two to four, you'd get
these values.
You'd get a three and four.
Now the reason why we don't get, cuz
remember
indexes start at zero, so it goes zero,
one, two.
So we select that value, that's the second
one.
And now we're going towards four.
However, three and four, you'd expect it
to return the value three, four, five.
But we're only returning the three, four.
And the reason for that is that final
actual number doesn't get found.
If we were to change that value there to
five, then it would select it and it would
work.
And also the rest of your method with
which you remove
the final number and it'll select from two
towards the end.
And if I were to change that to four and
remove the first number, it would
select, things up until the fourth index
or the third index.
So, from there, we'll be covering this in
more detail later on, and I'll be
explaining, certain uses for this
construction idea.
However, that is a very useful and
powerful tool while using listings.
The next thing that we have is something
called a dictionary,
which if you have programmed before is
similar to an associative array.
And the way you would declare these is by
using curly brackets.
So a curly open and close bracket would
declare it as being something being a
dictionary.
Now the idea of dictionary is that you
have a key
which you can define and a value which you
match it to.
So, something like this would be a common
idea for an array,
or for a dictionary, depending on what you
want to call it.
So if we were to save that in Word, you'd
see
we get the clasp of a dict, which is a
dictionary.
And we'd get the values of two and one.
Now, you'll realize that, you'll notice
that
these aren't actually in the same value
as what they are, or the same order which
they are when they're declared.
And the reason for that is because it's
a hashed table, and so the actual values
don't
get stored the same way in, in which they
do, that is, in which they get declared.
They get stored in the order in which it
is more suitable for them to be hashed in
need.
It's a memory order sort of thing.
so, I won't go and try and explain how it
orders them.
I'll just explain in fact there are ways
to sort it
which we'll be covering later on when we
do iterations or looping.
But if you were to have a dictionary and
you can declare it using this sort of
idea.
However your latest bit we have we have to
have quotes around the
strings and we don't have quotes around
numbers, that's, that's a very important
thing.
If you have a quote around a number, it no
longer,
it stays as a number, it gets converted to
a string.
So,
and also these can be changed around, but
the one thing you
need to remember with dictionaries is, is,
when this is the key,
or we also call that the index sometimes,
and this
here is the value, which is related to the
key.
So I could change this around to put that
as
being five, it makes no logical sense to
do that idea.
However, but if we were to have something
different, so you call this ID and this
one name, I can change this to be Alex and
it would work.
So
when you're using dictionaries as an
associative array, the data type
does not have to be the same within the
actual array.
And the same with listings, it doesn't
have to
be the type, the same type within the
list.
Now, you may be wondering what the point
of
having a list is, if you can have
associative array.
And the reason why you'd use a list is
because it's actually considered faster to
run because it gets returned in the same
order in which it gets declared at.
So, if you were, if you knew [UNKNOWN]
location where something was,
you'd use a list, because then you could
declare what that location is.
Whereas using this sort of idea, you'd
need to run extra functions to find
out the actual location of the storage, of
the piece of information that is stored.
Okay there's also another way in which you
can declare a dictionary.
And I'll just write that.
And that is using the dict function.
And the way that you do that is one is
equal to one.
Two is equal to two, and I'll just leave
it at that.
What you can see here, I'll just change
this as
well.
[SOUND] Okay if we save that now and run
that.
You'll notice that we get the same class.
It's another way of declaring it.
It's just a more readable way of declaring
it.
This can be put over multiple lines,
should you find it easier to do that.
However, you'll also notice that the keys
no longer need to have quotes around them.
The key gets equation [UNKNOWN]
automatically depending on, obviously data
type gets recognized as being [INAUDIBLE]
integer or, and or a string, basically.
And the value does still need a quote
around it.
However, this is considerably easier to
actually write because you need to hit the
the quote key considerably less often
which makes it faster and easier to write.
It also makes it easier to recognize it as
well because
it has the function of dict rather than
just curly brackets.
A final thing in which we have to talk
about is something called a Boolean.
Now a Boolean is a true or false that is
the two values of a Boolean.
So if we have a Boolean equal to false,
then you'll notice
that the class is Bool, and the value is
false, as you'd expect.
So false and also just true are both
keywords which
are used very, very often
within programming languages, and
especially Python.
You use them all the time without even
knowing it, most of, usually.
For example, if I was to declare two
variables and have
it as zero and one, then if I was to do
if a is equal to, equal to b, actually I
don't need these.
Okay, if a is equal to b, then
print and if we do that you'll
see that we get a Boolean of true.
Now what you see here is that we're doing
a check of a is equal to b.
Now a is not equal to b, and so what we're
getting is the output here, which we can
see if we do,
if we do else, and print false.
That you'll see that we get the value of
false.
And the reason for that is because we have
a is not equal
to b because a is equal to zero and b is
equal to one.
I should note that you can declare
multiple
variables on each line by separating by
commas, and
just make sure that you have the same
number
of values on the other side, separate by
commas.
So if I wanted to declare c, then I could
declare that as being number two there.
And that worked just the same way.
So, having true or false is used very
often
within Python, and other languages, but
usually without even being recognized.
The way in which they are used is a bit,
the the
value is being checked as to where there
is something equal to something.
If you're doing a double equals, which is
to check whether the values
are the same, if you use a single equals
sign, that is to.
Add something, to make something equal to
something, when using
double equals signs to check whether
something is equal to something.
So there is a big difference between
single and double equals signs,
and if you used the single equals sign
within here it wouldn't work.
It would just not run properly.
So, what you need to recognize within this
is that,
even though you have not seen the word
true at all.
It is a Boolean expression, it is checking
whether or not
something is true or false depending on
what keywords you're using.
I'll get into using logical operators
later on within the course.
However what you will see is, that this
sort of idea is happening quite often.
And this is just a Boolean check.
So if something doesn't happen as you'd
expect it to, there are ways
to debug it, which again I'll be covering
later on in the course.
Thank you for watching, this has been a
fairly long video, which I apologize for.
However I am sure that worst, it's taking
a long time to
get this far and we haven't, it doesn't
feel like you've done much.
Understanding this will make the rest
of the course considerably easier to
understand.
Once because, once you understand data
types,
you'll understand how things flow together
within.
So if you are slightly confused, I might,
I would recommend that you rewatch this
video,
or the bits in which you're confused
within
this video, and it will explain things to
you.
And hopefully, once you understand them,
it will
help you understand the rest of the
course.
If you do find this sort of slightly
difficult to get your hands around, to get
your mind around, and to understand,
watching the
rest of the course might also explain this
part.
So, it is up to you how you want to learn
this.
However, I would recommend that you
understand this from the mental
concept of programming before you
understand the rest of the course.
So I'm Alex [INAUDIBLE] from
Learntorogram.tv and thanks for watching.
[MUSIC]